CS39006: Assignment 5
Emulating End-to-End Reliable Flow Control over Unreliable
Communication Channels
Date: March 01, 2024
Due Date: March 22, 2024
In this assignment, you will be building support for end-to-end reliable data transfer on top of
an unreliable communication channel, with a window-based flow control approach.
You have been introduced to the function calls socket, bind, sendto, and recvfrom to work
with UDP sockets. Assume that the TCP sockets are not there. We know that UDP sockets
are not reliable, meaning that there is no guarantee that a message sent using a UDP socket
will reach the receiver. We want to implement our own socket type, called MTP (My Transport
Protocol) socket, that will guarantee that any message sent using a MTP socket is always
delivered to the receiver in order. Also, like UDP sockets. MTP is message-oriented, and not
byte-oriented.
For each MTP socket, the sender and the receiver maintain a sending window (swnd) and a
receiving window (rwnd), respectively. swnd is a data structure that contains the sequence
numbers of the messages sent but not yet acknowledged, and the window size indicating the
maximum number of messages that can be sent without receiving the corresponding
acknowledgement (ideally, this should not be more than the available space at the receiver
buffer at any instance of time). Similarly, rwnd is a data structure indicating the sequence
numbers that the receiver is expecting to receive and a window size indicating the maximum
number of messages it can receive depending on the available space at the receiver-side
message buffer. The messages are of fixed size (assume that message size is 1 KB), and the
messages have increasing sequence numbers (sequence number is of 4 bit length). The
sender always starts with the sequence number 1. The receiver maintains a message buffer
of size equivalent to 5 messages. The sender maintains a message buffer of size equal to 10
messages. Once the receiver receives an in-order message, the message is written to the
buffer after removing the MTP header, the free space in the buffer is computed and the rwnd
size is updated accordingly. The receiver then sends an ACK message to the sender which
piggybacks the updated rwnd size, and the sequence number of the last in-order message
received within rwnd. If the receiver receives an out of order message, it keeps the message
in the buffer (if the message sequence number is within rwnd), but sends an ACK message to
the sender with the sequence number of the last in-order message received and the updated
rwnd size. Note that the MTP receiver also needs to handle the duplicate messages by
identifying them with the sequence number and then dropping them if already received once.
However, for the duplicated messages also, it sends an ACK message to the sender with the
sequence number of the last in-order message received and the updated rwnd size. The
receiver side application periodically reads the messages (in 1 KB block, the entire message
is read atomically) from the message buffer and frees it up. Message are always delivered in
order to the application.At the sender side, MTP maintains a sender-side message buffer where the sender-side
application writes data in a block of 1KB. MTP initially sets swnd = 5 and starts sending the
messages after adding the required header (the header contains the message sequence
number; think of if you need any additional field in the header). Once the MTP sender receives
an ACK message, it updates the swnd accordingly (slides the window till the last message
acknowledged if not a duplicate ACK and increases/decreases the window size based on the
piggybacked rwnd size in the ACK message). The MTP sender also sets a timeout equivalent
to T seconds. If it does not receive an ACK message within the timeout duration, it retransmits
all the messages from the swnd (which had been transmitted earlier but not been
acknowledged).
Multiple user applications can create MTP sockets simultaneously; however, in your
implementation, you can assume that at any instance, there can be a maximum of N = 25
number of active MTP sockets. To implement these MTP sockets, we use the following:
1. UDP sockets through which all transport layer communication happens for the
corresponding MTP socket.
2. An init process P that initializes two threads R and S, and a shared memory as
mentioned next. Thread R handles all messages received from the UDP socket, and
thread S handles sending messages, and the timeouts and retransmissions. More
details of R and S are given later.
3. A shared memory chunk SM containing the information about N MTP sockets. SM[i] is
a structure indicating (i) whether the MTP socket with ID i is free or allotted, (ii) process
ID for the process that created the MTP socket, (iii) mapping from the MTP socket i to
the corresponding UDP socket id, (iv) the IP and port address of the other end of the
MTP socket, (v) the send buffer, and (vi) the receive buffer of the MTP socket with ID
i (fixed size array of messages), (vii) swnd (a structure of the sender window size along
with an array of message sequence numbers that have been sent but not
acknowledged), and (viii) rwnd (a structure of the receiver window size along with an
array of message sequence numbers that have been received but not acknowledged).
The shared memory is assigned a name that is assumed to be known a-priori to all
processes/threads that need to access it.
4. The init process should also start a garbage collector process G to clean up the
corresponding entry in the MTP socket if the corresponding process is killed and the
socket has not been closed explicitly.
You will be implementing a set of function calls m_socket, m_bind, m_sendto, m_recvfrom,
and m_close that implement MTP sockets. The parameters and return values to these
functions are exactly the same as the corresponding functions of the UDP socket, except for
m_bind. The functions will be implemented as a library. Any user wishing to use MTP sockets
will write a C program that will call these functions in the same sequence as when using UDP
sockets. A brief description of the functions is given below.
●
m_socket – This function opens an UDP socket with the socket call. The parameters
to these are the same as the normal socket() call, except that it will take only
SOCK_MTP as the socket type. m_socket() checks whether a free entry is available
in the SM, creates the corresponding UDP socket if a free entry is available, andinitializes SM with corresponding entries. If no free entry is available, it returns -1 with
the global error variable set to ENOBUFS. If any error is received while creating the
UDP socket, errno is set to the corresponding error.
●m_bind – binds the socket with some address-port using the bind call. Bind is
necessary for each MTP socket irrespective of whether it is used as a server or a client.
This function takes the source IP, the source port, the destination IP and the
destination port. It binds the UDP socket with the source IP and source port, and
updates the corresponding SM with the destination IP and destination port. If any error
is received while binding the UDP socket, errno is set to the corresponding error, and
SM is not updated. The idea here is that a single MTP socket is used to communicate
with another pre-specified MTP socket only (different from how an UDPP socket
behaves, even though MTP uses UDP underneath).
●m_sendto – writes the message to the sender side message buffer if the destination
IP/Port matches with the bounded IP/Port as set through m_bind(). If not, it drops the
message, returns -1 and sets the global error variable to ENOTBOUND. If there is no
space is the send buffer, return -1 and set the global error variable to ENOBUFS. So
the m_sendto call is non-blocking.
●m_recvfrom – looks up the receiver-side message buffer to see if any message is
already received. If yes, it returns the first message (in-order) and deletes that
message from the table. If not, it returns with -1 and sets a global error variable to
ENOMSG, indicating no message has been available in the message buffer. So the
m_recvfrom call is non-blocking.
●m_close – closes the socket and cleans up the corresponding socket entry in the SM
and marks the entry as free.
The thread R behaves in the following manner. It waits for a message to come in a
recvfrom() call from any of the UDP sockets (you need to use select() to keep on checking
whether there is any incoming message on any of the UDP sockets, on timeout check whether
a new MTP socket has been created and include it in the read/write set accordingly). When it
receives a message, if it is a data message, it stores it in the receiver-side message buffer for
the corresponding MTP socket (by searching SM with the IP/Port), and sends an ACK
message to the sender. In addition it also sets a flag nospace if the available space at the
receive buffer is zero. On a timeout over select(), it additionally checks whether the flag
nospace was set but now there is space available in the receive buffer. In that case, it sends
a duplicate ACK message with the last acknowledged sequence number but with the updated
rwnd size, and resets the flag (there might be a problem here – try to find it out and resolve!).
If the received message is an ACK message in response to a previously sent message, it
updates the swnd and removes the message from the sender-side message buffer for the
corresponding MTP socket. If the received message is a duplicate ACK message, it just
updates the swnd size.
The thread S behaves in the following manner. It sleeps for some time ( < T/2 ), and wakes
up periodically. On waking up, it first checks whether the message timeout period (T) is over(by computing the time difference between the current time and the time when the messages
within the window were sent last) for the messages sent over any of the active MTP sockets.
If yes, it retransmits all the messages within the current swnd for that MTP socket. It then
checks the current swnd for each of the MTP sockets and determines whether there is a
pending message from the sender-side message buffer that can be sent. If so, it sends that
message through the UDP sendto() call for the corresponding UDP socket and updates the
send timestamp.
Design the message formats and the shared memory properly. Note that different fields in the
shared memory are accessed by different threads and processes and would require proper
mutual exclusion.
Testing your code:
To test the program, write two programs user1.c and user2.c. user1.c creates an MTP socket
M1, binds it to IP_1, Port_1 (local IP and Port), IP_2, Port_2 (remote IP and Port). User2.c
creates an MTP socket M2 and binds it to IP_2, Port_2 (local IP and Port), IP_1, Port_1
(remote IP and Port). M1 then uses the m_sendto() call to transfer a large file (size > 100 KB),
and M2 uses the m_recvfrom() to receive the contents of that file and write it in a new file. You
can run user1.c and user2.c with different IP/Port pairs to create multiple MTP sockets.
You should first start with one pair of MTP sockets, i.e. with a single instance of user1.c and
user2.c, and then extend it for multiple applications. If your code supports only two statically
assigned sockets with the support of all other functionalities, then you’ll be evaluated out of
75% of the total marks.
As the actual number of drops in your machine or in the lab environment will be near 0, you
will need to simulate an unreliable link. To do this, in the library created, add a function called
dropMessage() with the following prototype:
int dropMessage(float p)
where p is a probability between 0 and 1. This function first generates a random number
between 0 and 1. If the generated number is < p, then the function returns 1, else it returns 0.
Now, in the code for thread R, after a message is received (by the recvfrom() call on the
UDP socket), first make a call to dropMessage(). If it returns 1, do not take any action on the
message (irrespective of whether it is data or ack) and just return to wait to receive the next
message. If it returns 0, continue with the normal processing in R. Thus, if dropMessage()
returns 1, the message received is not processed and hence can be thought of as lost. Link
the programs in user1.c and user2.c with this new library. Submit your code with the
dropMessage() calls in R, do NOT remove these calls from your code before you submit.
The value of T should be 5 seconds (do not hardcode it deep inside your code, specify it in a
.h file (see below)). The value of the parameter p (the probability) should also be specified in
the same .h file (see below). When you test your program, vary p from 0.05 to 0.05 in steps of
0.05 (0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2....,0.45, 0.5). For each p value, for the same file, count the average
number of transmissions made to send each message (total number of transmissions that aremade to send the message / no. of messages generated from the file). Report this in a table
in the beginning of the file documentation.txt (see below).
Even though it is not needed for this assignment, you should try to also vary T (especially low
values) and see its effect. This is an extremely important parameter that affects the
transmission. If you do this, set p to 0, and use the nanosleep() call of Linux in S as the
sleep() call has a resolution of seconds only, so you cannot set T to anything less than 1
second using a sleep() call.
What to submit:
The five required functions, plus the function dropMessage(), should be implemented as a
static library called libmsocket.a so that a user can write a C program using these calls for
reliable communication and link with it (the function dropMessage() will not be called by the
user but you will call it when you test your program). Look up the ar command under Linux to
see how to build a static library. Building a library means creating a .h file containing all
definitions needed for the library (for ex., among other things, you will #define SOCK_MTP
here), and a .c file containing the code for the functions in the library. This .c file should not
contain any main() function, and will be compiled using ar command to create a .a library
file. Thus, you will write the .h header file (name it msocket.h) and the .c file (name it
msocket.c) from which the .a library file will be generated. Any application wishing to call these
functions will include the .h file and link with the libmsocket.a library. For example, when we
want to use functions in the math library like sqrt(), we include math.h in our C file, and then
link with the math library libm.a.
The value of the parameter T should be #defined as “#define T 5” in the msocket.h file.
The value of the parameter p should also be #defined in this .h file.
You should submit the following files in a single tar.gz file:
● msocket.h and msocket.c
● initmsocket.c that initializes the MTP socket by starting the R and S threads and the
garbage collector process
● user1.c and user2.c
● a makefile to generate libmsocket.a
● a makefile to create the executable to run initmsocket.c
● a makefile to create the two executable files to run from user1.c and user2,c
respectively
● a file called documentation.txt containing the following:
○ For msocket.h and msocket.c, as well as for initmsocket.c, give a list of all data
structures used and a brief description of their fields and their purpose, and a
list of all functions along with what they do in msocket.c and initmsocket.c.
○ The table with the results for varying p values as described earlier.

The problem is that though two processes, creating two sockets, will not be able to bind to the same IP-port, the socket id returned by their socket calls can be the same as socket id is on a per-process basis. So the UDP socket id created when a user process makes m_socket() call or m_bind() call, is not the socket id that init process understands, so S and R cannot use it to send/receive. So to solve it, init process needs to create the socket and bind it when m_socket() or m_bind() call is made. This needs some additional synchronization. The solution proposed is below. It makes one assumption that only one process will call socket()/bind() at one time (that can be removed, but makes the solution bit more complex, so we allow it).
But essentially, you will have to make all calls on the actual UDP socket from init process only.

Note that whenever you access a shared memory, you have to ensure mutual exclusion, that is understood, so not written separately.

Init process, in addition to what we have given, does this:
1. Create a shared memory structure SOCK_INFO with the following fields: sock_id, IP, port,, errno. All are initialized to 0.
2. Create 2 semaphores Sem1 and Sem2. Both are initialized to 0.
3. The main thread, after creating S and R and doing everything else, does the following:
(a) wait on Sem1
(b) On being signaled, look at SOCK_INFO.
(c) If all fields are 0, it is a m_socket call. Create a UDP socket. Put the socket id returned in the sock_id field of SOCK_INFO.  If error, put -1 in sock_id field and errno in errno field. Signal on Sem2.
(d) if sock_id, IP, and port are non-zero, it is a m_bind call. Make a bind() call on the sock_id value, with the IP and port given. If error, reset sock_id to -1 in the structure and put errno in errno field. Signal on Sem2.
(e) Go back to wait on Sem1

m_socket call:
Looks at SM to find a free entry as usual. Then signals on Sem1 and then waits on Sem2. On being woken, checks sock_id field of SOCK_INFO. If -1, return error and set errno correctly. If not, put UDP socket id returned in that field in SM table (same as if m_socket called socket()) and return the index in SM table as usual. In both cases, reset all fields of SOCK_INFO to 0.


m_bind call:
Find the corresponding actual UDP socket id from the SM table. Put the UDP socket ID, IP, and port in SOCK_INFO table. Signal Sem1. Then wait on Sem2. On being woken, checks sock_id field of SOCK_INFO. If -1, return error and set errno correctly. If not return success.
In both cases, reset all fields of SOCK_INFO to 0.

Rest remains the same.

Assumption. No two processes will make m_socket or m_bind calls together 

 you should also make the garbage collector G a thread of the init process instead of a process as it also needs to close UDP sockets. Its functionality remains the same.